==================
SQLAlchemy Support
==================

Since most people prefer to use an ORM the `crate` client library provides
support for SQLAlchemy out of the box.

The Dialect is installed and registered by default (e.g. if `crate` was
installed using pip) and can be used without further configuration.

Connection String
-----------------

In SQLAlchemy a connection is established using the `create_engine` function.
This function takes a connection string that varies from database to database.

In order to connect to a crate cluster the following connection strings are
valid::

    >>> sa.create_engine('crate://')
    Engine(crate://)

This will connect to the default server ('127.0.0.1:9200'). In order to
connect to a different server the following syntax can be used::

    >>> sa.create_engine('crate://otherserver:9200')
    Engine(crate://otherserver:9200)

Since Crate is a clustered database that usually consists of multiple server it
is recommended to connect to all of them. This enables the DB-API layer to use
round-robin to distribute the load and skip a server if it becomes unavailable.

The `connect_args` parameter has to be used to do so::

    >>> sa.create_engine('crate://', connect_args={
    ...     'servers': ['host1:9200', 'host2:9200']
    ... })
    Engine(crate://)


Supported Operations and Limitations
====================================

Currently Crate only implements a subset of the `SQL` standard. Therefore many
operations that SQLAlchemy provides are currently not supported.

An overview of supported operations::

 - simple select statements including filter operations, limit and offset. But
   without joins or subselects. Order by is also supported.
 - Inserting new rows.

Unlike other databases that are usually used with SQLAlchemy, Crate isn't a
RDBMS but instead is document oriented with `eventual consistency
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Eventual_consistency>`_.

This means that there is no transaction support and the database should be
modeled without relationships.

In SQLAlchemy a `Session` object is used to query the database. This `Session`
object contains a `rollback` method that in `Crate` won't do anything at all.
Similar the `commit` method will only `flush` but not actually commit, as there
is no commit in crate.

Please refer to the `SQLAlchemy documentation
<http://docs.sqlalchemy.org/en/rel_0_8/orm/tutorial.html#adding-new-objects>`_
for more information about the session management and the concept of `flush`.

Complex Types
=============

In a document oriented database it is a common pattern to store complex objects
within a single field. For such cases the `crate` package provides the `Dict`
type::

    >>> from crate.client.sqlalchemy.types import Dict
    >>> from uuid import uuid4

    >>> def gen_key():
    ...     return str(uuid4())

    >>> class Character(Base):
    ...     __tablename__ = 'characters'
    ...     id = sa.Column(sa.String, primary_key=True, default=gen_key)
    ...     name = sa.Column(sa.String)
    ...     details = sa.Column(Dict)

    >>> arthur = Character(name='Arthur Dent')
    >>> arthur.details = {}
    >>> arthur.details['gender'] = 'male'
    >>> arthur.details['species'] = 'human'
    >>> session.add(arthur)

    >>> trillian = Character(name='Tricia McMillan')
    >>> trillian.details = {}
    >>> trillian.details['gender'] = 'female'
    >>> trillian.details['species'] = 'human'
    >>> trillian.details['female_only_attribute'] = 1
    >>> session.add(trillian)
    >>> session.flush()

Note that the 'gender' and 'species' attributes weren't defined in the schema
above. And Trillian contains an additional property that Arthur doesn't have.

TODO: refresh::

    >>> from time import sleep
    >>> sleep(2)

    >>> query = session.query(Character).order_by(Character.name)
    >>> [(c.name, c.details['gender']) for c in query]
    [('Arthur Dent', 'male'), ('Tricia McMillan', 'female')]

It is then also possible to filter by these attributes::

    >>> query = session.query(Character.name)
    >>> query.filter(Character.details['gender'] == 'male').all()

In addition to that it is also possible to select just a part of the details
property::

    >>> session.query(Character.details['gender']).all()

.. note::

    In the example above the `Character` class extends the `Base` class which
    was created using `declarative_base(bind=engine)`.
    
    Usually `declarative_base` can be called without passing the engine, but
    then the `Dict` column type can't be used because SQLAlchemy won't utilize
    the Crate specific compiler.
